Comet 1.0.0 Blog Post (#201)
apache/datafusion-site: content/blog/2026-08-07-datafusion-comet-1.0.0.md

### Performance

The early Comet releases provided a very modest speedup and the published benchmark results were based on running TPC workloads at small scale factors on a single node. There are now independent benchmark results published by AWS Labs that show significant speedups for [TPC-DS @ 3TB running in EKS](https://awslabs.github.io/data-on-eks/docs/benchmarks/spark-datafusion-comet-benchmark).

### Codegen Dispatch

Comet 0.17.0 introduced a new approach to filling gaps in expression coverage. In earlier releases,
whenever Comet's planner encountered an expression that lacked a native Rust implementation, it fell back
to executing an entire subtree of the plan in Spark. That required converting Arrow columns back to Spark
rows before the expression ran and back to Arrow after, and the cost was often enough to erase the speedup
Comet had bought elsewhere in the plan.

Codegen dispatch scopes that fallback down to the expression itself: the batch stays in the Comet pipeline
and Comet invokes Spark's own generated code for just the missing expression, leaving the rest of the query

> running natively. Three consequences are worth calling out.

Reviewer: I would add a fourth: expression fusion. Because we compile these expressions in the same dispatch, the compile is free to run suitable optimizations and it avoids intermittent materialization of entire Arrow RecordBatches between each expression.

the absence of a fallback reason.

[Scala and Java UDF guide]: https://datafusion.apache.org/comet/user-guide/latest/scala_java_udfs.html

## Improvements since 0.17.0

The rest of this post covers what is new since the 0.17.0 release.

### Experimental PyArrow UDF Support

This release adds experimental support for accelerated PyArrow UDFs, allowing PyArrow-based user-defined
functions to participate in native execution instead of forcing a fallback to Spark. When the feature is
disabled, Comet now hints at the native PyArrow UDF path in its fallback reasons so users know the option
exists. This is an early-stage feature and we welcome feedback from users experimenting with it.

### New Expression and Aggregate Support

This release expands the set of Spark expressions and aggregates that are accelerated by Comet:

- **Aggregates**: `approx_percentile` / `percentile_approx`, exact `percentile` / `median`,
  `approx_count_distinct`, and native `collect_list` / `array_agg`.
- **Cast**: Cast expressions where the native implementation is marked as incompatible or unsupported
  are now routed through codegen dispatch.
- **Grouping**: `grouping()` and `grouping_id()`.

> - **Intervals**: interval types via `make_ym_interval` and `make_dt_interval`, `CalendarIntervalType`,

Reviewer 2: (nit) Maybe we can call out interval support b/c adding new types is infrequent.

- **Comet SQL tests**: a sqllogictest-inspired approach that makes end-to-end tests easier to write.
- **Generative AI audits**: agentic skills sweep every expression, comparing Comet's implementation to Spark's source and ensuring tests cover important edge cases.

### Performance

The early Comet releases provided a very modest speedup and the published benchmark results were based on running TPC workloads at small scale factors on a single node. There are now independent benchmark results published by AWS Labs that show significant speedups for [TPC-DS @ 3TB running in EKS](https://awslabs.github.io/data-on-eks/docs/benchmarks/spark-datafusion-comet-benchmark).

### Codegen Dispatch

Comet 0.17.0 introduced a new approach to filling gaps in expression coverage. In earlier releases,
whenever Comet's planner encountered an expression that lacked a native Rust implementation, it fell back
to executing an entire subtree of the plan in Spark. That required converting Arrow columns back to Spark
rows before the expression ran and back to Arrow after, and the cost was often enough to erase the speedup

> Comet had bought elsewhere in the plan.

Reviewer: These ideas seem in conflict with each other. It talks about the an entire subtree executing in Spark, but then it mentioned converting back and forth to Arrow. Is it fair to say that subsequent stage operators ran in Spark, and then the next stage would pay the cost of converting back, or is that still not quite it? Maybe we just generalize it a bit and just say that fallbacks incurred expensive Arrow transitions and not worry about stages and subtrees.

Codegen dispatch narrows that fallback to the expression itself: the batch stays in the Comet pipeline
and Comet invokes Spark's own generated code for just the missing expression, leaving the rest of the query
running natively. Four consequences are worth calling out.

- **Coverage.** Expressions that would previously have blocked native execution of a whole subtree are
  now supported immediately, without a Rust port.
- **Compatibility.** For categories where a native reimplementation would inevitably diverge from Spark's
  semantics — regular expressions being the canonical case, given the gap between Java's regex engine and
  any Rust or C++ equivalent — codegen dispatch delivers bit-for-bit Spark parity because it *is* Spark's
  implementation.

> - **Expression fusion.** A dispatched expression tree is compiled into a single method, so the Arrow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Expression fusion.** A dispatched expression tree (_i.e._, nested expressions) is compiled into a single method, so the Arrow
```

  `uuid` — both bit-for-bit compatible with Spark for a given seed.
- **Array / map**: `array_prepend`, the `shuffle()` array function, `size()` for `MapType`, and `ElementAt`
  over `MapType`.
- **Date/time**: native `TimestampNTZ` inputs for `hour` / `minute` / `second` and
  `PreciseTimestampConversion` for native time-window grouping.
- **Windows**: extended native window function support and Spark 4 decimal window average.

### Faster Parquet Scans

Parquet reads pick up several improvements as well. Full Parquet metadata, including the page index, is now
cached via DataFusion's `CachedParquetFileReaderFactory`; identity casts are unwrapped in the schema adapter
so Parquet statistics pruning can engage; filter pushdown configuration has been revised; the native scan
passes a metadata size hint so a single read usually captures the footer; and the native Parquet scan seeds
its reader options from the session config so Parquet settings you already set take effect.

### Iceberg Table Format V3

Comet now supports Iceberg 1.11 and Iceberg table format V3 (with native table decryption for V3 tables and

> fallback to Spark for other V3 features). The native Iceberg scan supports the `_pos`, `_spec`, `_file`, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comet now supports Iceberg 1.11 and its first Iceberg table format V3 feature: full table encryption. Other V3 features like deletion vectors and new data types (_e.g._, `VARIANT`) fall back gracefully. The native Iceberg scan supports the `_pos`, `_spec`, `_file`, and
```

---
layout: post
title: Apache DataFusion Comet 1.0.0 Release
date: 2026-08-07
author: pmc
categories: [subprojects]
---

<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

[TOC]

> The Apache DataFusion PMC is pleased to announce version 1.0.0 of the [Comet](https://datafusion.apache.org/comet/) subproject.

Author: This link won't be active until https://github.com/apache/datafusion-comet/pull/5263 is merged

  guide, down to the expression level, so you can see where Comet is known to diverge from Spark before you
  hit it in production rather than after.

The rest of this post covers what is new since 0.17.0.

## Native Expression Performance

A large share of this release is dedicated to making Comet's native scalar expressions faster. These kernels
run per-row or per-batch, so improvements here compound across every query that uses them. Expressions with
optimized implementations in this release include:

- **Casts** between numeric, string, decimal, and date types, including a faster float-to-decimal cast, an
  optimized integer-to-integer cast, shared no-overflow fast paths in `CheckOverflow` and
  `DecimalRescaleCheckOverflow`, and a `cast_binary_to_string` that is up to 27x faster on binary-format
  styles.
- **JSON, regex, and URL parsing**: `get_json_object`, `regexp_extract`, and `parse_url`.
- **Date/time and decimal kernels**: `date_trunc`, `spark_ceil`, and a vectorized `spark_unscaled_value`.
- **String and array kernels**: `lpad`, `unhex`, `size`, `arrays_overlap`, `escape_string`, and the `try_*`
  arithmetic kernel.

> To make this kind of work repeatable, the release also adds a scalar expression optimization guide

Reviewer 2: (nit) Add a link to [guide](https://datafusion.apache.org/comet/contributor-guide/optimizing_expressions.html)

  and `decimal` now use Spark's exact trim rules. Comet's kernels had used four different trim sets, three of
  them wrong, so results diverged in both directions — returning null where Spark parses a value, and
  returning a value where Spark returns null.
- **ANSI errors swallowed by null short-circuit.** The codegen dispatcher's null short-circuit no longer
  swallows errors Spark raises. Spark evaluates null-intolerant expressions per node and left to right, so
  short-circuiting on the union of input ordinals skipped subtrees Spark would have evaluated, losing their
  errors. Roughly 70 built-in expressions route through this dispatcher and ANSI is on by default in Spark 4,
  so this affected a wide surface.

Alongside the bug fixes, Comet also adds conservative fallbacks where native behavior could not be made to
match — decimal `SUM` / `AVG` over sliding window frames, `FromUnixTime` with a non-default format, and a
handful of others — and falls back for predicates and datetime expressions under non-default collations
rather than risking a wrong result.

## New Expression and Aggregate Support

> This release expands the set of Spark expressions and aggregates that run natively:

Reviewer 3: we can add wider generator support, `explode/explode_outer/posexplode/posexplode_outer`

- **Removed dead configs.** The Parquet parallel-IO knobs, `spark.comet.use.lazyMaterialization`, and
  `spark.comet.exceptionOnDatetimeRebase` had no remaining effect and were misleading anyone tuning against
  them.
- **Removed async columnar shuffle.** The `spark.comet.columnar.shuffle.async.*` path was off by default and
  untested, and has been removed rather than carried into a stable release line.

## Documentation

The documentation received a substantial overhaul for 1.0: a design refresh of the docs site, versioned user
guides with captioned sidebar sections, and a set of accessibility and navigation fixes. The
supported-expressions page now shows how each expression is implemented — native, codegen dispatch, or hybrid
— generated from the planner itself rather than maintained by hand. An expanded tuning guide covers the
performance and memory configs that matter in practice, and there is an updated post-1.0 roadmap and a new
blog posts and talks page.

## Deprecation Notice

With the move to a stable 1.0 release line, Comet begins deprecating older platforms under semantic
versioning:

- **JDK 11** is deprecated and scheduled for removal in Comet 1.1.0.

> - **Apache Spark 3.4** is deprecated and scheduled for removal in Comet 1.1.0.

Reviewer 3: this is too early?

Author: This matches the versioning policy that we published as part of the 1.0.0 release
